Cvs 89108 metrics documentation (#1403)
openvinotoolkit/model_server: docs/monitoring.md

> # Enabling monitoring {#ovms_docs_monitoring}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# metrics {#ovms_docs_metrics}
```

> ## Introduction to Metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Introduction
```

> This document describes enabling and usage of different metrics in OVMS server that can be used for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes how to use metrics endpoint in the OpenVINO Model Server. They can be applied for:
```

> - Providing performance statistics for monitoring and benchmarking purposes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Providing performance and utilization statistics for monitoring and benchmarking purposes
```

> - Ability to auto scale model server instances in Kubernetes based on application related metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Auto scaling of the model server instances in Kubernetes and OpenShift based on application related metrics
```

> **NOTE**: currently, Metrics feature is released as a preview feature.

> Internal metrics remove dependencies on the 3rd party components and allow tracking performance without extra communication hop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Built-in metrics allows tracking the performance without any extra logic on the client side or using network traffic monitoring tools like load balancers or reverse-proxies.
```

It also exposes metrics which are not related to the traffic. 

> For example number of Idle execution streams, which models were used, model load time etc, which device was used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example statistics of the inference execution queue, model runtime parameters etc. They can also track the usage based on model version, API type or requested endpoint methods.
```

> There are four types of metrics: 

Reviewer: Drop this info about metrics types. Mention here that OpenVINO Model Server metrics are compatible with Prometheus standard https://prometheus.io/docs 

Add also info that metrics are exposed on `metrics` endpoint path.

Author: Ok

Counter � counts the number of specific events 

Gauge � shows current state of the ovms or model 

Histograms � shows distributions of counters per range 

Summary � shows quantiles � will not be used on the server side 

For more information please visit [Prometheus metrics detailed description](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/)

> 

Reviewer: Here should be a table with the list of metrics (families):
metric, type, labels, description

Author: Ok

## Enable metrics

> By default, the metrics feature is disabled during standard server usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the metrics feature is disabled.
```

> To enable default metrics set you need to specify the metrics_enabled flag or json setting:

Reviewer: Metrics endpoint is using the same port like the REST interface for running the model queries. It is required to enable REST in the model server by setting the parameter --rest_port.

Author: Ok

CLI

>    ```bash

Reviewer: to make the examples easier and functional, you could use the public model from gs

Author: Done.

         docker run --rm -d -v ${PWD}/models/resnet-50-tf:/opt/model -p 9001:9001 -p 9002:9002 openvino/model_server:latest \
               --model_path /opt/model --model_name resnet --port 9001 \
               --rest_port 9002 \
               --metrics_enabled
   ```

CONFIG CMD

   ```bash

>          docker run --rm -d -v -d -v ${PWD}/workspace:/workspace openvino/model_server --config_path /workspace/config.json -p 9001:9001 -p 9002:9002 openvino/model_server:latest \

Reviewer: use standard ports like with have in all demos

Author: Ok.

Reviewer: in other samples there is used rest port 8000. can be make the same in the command example?

Author: Fixed in new version.

               --rest_port 9002
   ```

CONFIG JSON

   ```bash
   {
    "model_config_list": [
        {
           "config": {
                "name": "resnet",
                "base_path": "/workspace/resnet-50-tf",
                "layout": "NHWC:NCHW",
                "shape": "(1,224,224,3)"
           }
        }
    ],
    "monitoring":
        {
            "metrics":
            {
                "enable" : true
            }
        }
   }
   ```

> ## Restrict only certain metrics via config.json and CLI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Change the default list of metrics
```

CLI

   ```bash
         docker run --rm -d -v ${PWD}/models/resnet-50-tf:/opt/model -p 9001:9001 -p 9002:9002 openvino/model_server:latest \
               --model_path /opt/model --model_name resnet --port 9001 \
               --rest_port 9002 \
               --metrics_enabled
               --metrics_list ovms_requests_success,ovms_infer_req_queue_size
   ```

CONFIG CMD

   ```bash
         docker run --rm -d -v -d -v ${PWD}/workspace:/workspace openvino/model_server --config_path /workspace/config.json -p 9001:9001 -p 9002:9002 openvino/model_server:latest \
               --rest_port 9002
   ```

CONFIG JSON

   ```bash
   {
    "model_config_list": [
        {
           "config": {
                "name": "resnet",
                "base_path": "/workspace/resnet-50-tf",
                "layout": "NHWC:NCHW",
                "shape": "(1,224,224,3)"
           }
        }
    ],
    "monitoring":
        {
            "metrics":
            {
                "enable" : true,
                "metrics_list": ["ovms_requests_success", "ovms_infer_req_queue_size"]
            }
        }
    }
    ```

> ## Available metrics families

Reviewer: let's drop such list in favor of a table with the list of metrics families

Author: Ok

Metrics from default list are enabled with the metrics_enabled flag or json configuration.

However, you can enable also additional metrics by listing all the metrics you want to enable in the metric_list flag or json configuration.

DEFAULT

   ```bash
        ovms_streams
        ovms_current_requests
        ovms_requests_success
        ovms_requests_fail
        ovms_request_time_us
        ovms_inference_time_us
        ovms_wait_for_infer_req_time_us
   ```

ADDITIONAL

   ```bash
        ovms_infer_req_queue_size
        ovms_infer_req_active
   ```

> ## List of available metrics per interface

Reviewer: let's drop such list in favor of a table with the list of metrics families

Author: Ok

        ovms_requests_success_grpc_getmodelstatus
        ovms_requests_success_grpc_modelinfer
        ovms_requests_success_grpc_modelmetadata
        ovms_requests_success_grpc_modelready
        ovms_requests_success_rest_modelinfer
        ovms_requests_success_rest_predict
        ovms_requests_success_rest_modelmetadata
        ovms_requests_success_rest_modelstatus
        ovms_requests_success_rest_modelmetadata
        ovms_requests_success_rest_modelready
   ```

ovms_requests_fail

   ```bash
        ovms_requests_fail_grpc_predict
        ovms_requests_fail_grpc_getmodelmetadata
        ovms_requests_fail_grpc_getmodelstatus
        ovms_requests_fail_grpc_modelinfer
        ovms_requests_fail_grpc_modelmetadata
        ovms_requests_fail_grpc_modelready
        ovms_requests_fail_rest_modelinfer
        ovms_requests_fail_rest_predict
        ovms_requests_fail_rest_modelmetadata
        ovms_requests_fail_rest_modelstatus
        ovms_requests_fail_rest_modelmetadata
        ovms_requests_fail_rest_modelready
   ```

ovms_request_time_us

   ```bash
        ovms_request_time_us_grpc
        ovms_request_time_us_rest
   ```

> ## Changing metric endpoint port via CLI

Reviewer: drop the section, this is not implemented so far

Author: Ok

Currently the metrics endpoint is located on the '''rest_port/metrics''' endpoint.

Changing the default setting is not part of the preview feature.

> ## Example response from metrics endpoint

Reviewer: I think we could drop it because the output with the list of all metrics would be too long for this doc.
Add a curl command to test the endpoint instead:
curl http://localhost:port/metrics

Author: Done.

TODO

## Example graphics from Graphana

TODO

> ## Alternative for internal OVMS metrics: 

Reviewer: I would drop this section unless we would describe a complete solution or point to it

Author: Ok

Using 3rd party components acting as proxy between the clients and the server. 

Examples are HAproxy, IstIo mesh, openshift mesh, Kubernetes ingress controller. 

> ## Hardware specific metrics

Reviewer: Let's drop this section. For now there are no HW exporters to offer

Author: Ok

# Metrics {#ovms_docs_metrics}

## Introduction

This document describes how to use metrics endpoint in the OpenVINO Model Server. They can be applied for:

- Providing performance and utilization statistics for monitoring and benchmarking purposes

- Auto scaling of the model server instances in Kubernetes and OpenShift based on application related metrics

> **NOTE**: currently, Metrics feature is released as a preview feature.

> Built-in metrics allows tracking the performance without any extra logic on the client side or using network traffic monitoring tools like load balancers or reverse-proxies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Built-in metrics allow tracking the performance without any extra logic on the client side or using network traffic monitoring tools like load balancers or reverse-proxies.
```

Author: Done

> It also exposes metrics which are not related to the traffic. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also exposes metrics which are not related to the network traffic. 
```

Author: Done.

However, you can enable also additional metrics by listing all the metrics you want to enable in the `metric_list` flag or json configuration.

DEFAULT

   ```bash
         gauge       ovms_streams                        Number of OpenVINO execution streams.
         gauge       ovms_current_requests               Number of inference requests currently in process.
         counter     ovms_requests_success               Number of successful requests to a model or a DAG.
         counter     ovms_requests_fail                  Number of failed requests to a model or a DAG.
         histogram   ovms_request_time_us                Processing time of requests to a model or a DAG.
         histogram   ovms_inference_time_us              Inference execution time in the OpenVINO backend.
         histogram   ovms_wait_for_infer_req_time_us     Request waiting time in the scheduling queue.
   ```

ADDITIONAL

   ```bash
         gauge   ovms_infer_req_queue_size       Inference request queue size (nireq).
         gauge   ovms_infer_req_active           Number of currently consumed inference request from the processing queue.
   ```

> ## List of available metrics labels

Reviewer: why don't we list the labels in the same table like above in additional column. It could be just "api, interface,method,name,version"
We could include also a table with description of the labels:
label_name,  description, values

Author: Done.

                "metrics_list": ["ovms_requests_success", "ovms_infer_req_queue_size"]
            }
        }
    }
    ```

CONFIG JSON WITH ALL METRICS ENABLED

```bash
   {
    "model_config_list": [
        {
           "config": {
                "name": "resnet",
                "base_path": "/workspace/resnet-50-tf",
                "layout": "NHWC:NCHW",
                "shape": "(1,224,224,3)"
           }
        }
    ],
    "monitoring":
        {
            "metrics":
            {
                "enable" : true,
                "metrics_list": 
                    [ "ovms_requests_success",
                    "ovms_requests_fail",
                    "ovms_inference_time_us",
                    "ovms_wait_for_infer_req_time_us",
                    "ovms_request_time_us",
                    "ovms_current_requests",
                    "ovms_infer_req_active",
                    "ovms_streams",
                    "ovms_infer_req_queue_size"]
            }
        }
    }
    ```

## Example response from metrics endpoint

To use data from metrics endpoint you can use the curl command:
```bash
    curl http://localhost:8000/metrics
```

> The example output looks like this:

Reviewer: maybe instead of using a part of the output it will be better to use a link to a complete response (including values after running some load)

Author: Ok.

    ovms_requests_success{api="KServe",interface="gRPC",method="ModelReady",name="resnet"} 0
    ovms_requests_success{api="KServe",interface="gRPC",method="ModelInfer",name="resnet",version="1"} 0
    ovms_requests_success{api="KServe",interface="REST",method="ModelInfer",name="resnet",version="1"} 0
    ovms_requests_success{api="KServe",interface="gRPC",method="ModelMetadata",name="resnet",version="1"} 0
    ovms_requests_success{api="TensorFlowServing",interface="REST",method="Predict",name="resnet",version="1"} 0
    ovms_requests_success{api="TensorFlowServing",interface="gRPC",method="GetModelStatus",name="resnet"} 0
    ovms_requests_success{api="KServe",interface="REST",method="ModelReady",name="resnet"} 0
    ovms_requests_success{api="TensorFlowServing",interface="REST",method="GetModelStatus",name="resnet"} 0
    ovms_requests_success{api="TensorFlowServing",interface="gRPC",method="GetModelMetadata",name="resnet",version="1"} 0
    ovms_requests_success{api="TensorFlowServing",interface="REST",method="GetModelMetadata",name="resnet",version="1"} 0
    ovms_requests_success{api="TensorFlowServing",interface="gRPC",method="Predict",name="resnet",version="1"} 0
```

> ## Differences between metrics against model or a DAG

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Metrics implementation for DAG pipelines
```

Author: Done.

> For DAG pipeline execution there are six metrics available:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For [DAG pipeline](dag_scheduler.md) execution there are relevant 3 metrics listed below. They track the execution as a whole request processing all the pipeline nodes. 
```

Author: Done.

DAG METRICS

   ```bash
         counter     ovms_requests_success               Number of successful requests to a model or a DAG.
         counter     ovms_requests_fail                  Number of failed requests to a model or a DAG.
         histogram   ovms_request_time_us                Processing time of requests to a model or a DAG.
   ```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining metrics track the execution for the individual models in the pipeline separately. It means that each request to the DAG pipeline will update also the metrics for all individual models used as the execution nodes.
```

Author: Done.

> ## Example graphics from Graphana

Reviewer: We can add this section when the graphs are ready to show

Author: Ok.
